DATS 6101 - Introduction to Data Science
Spring 2017

COURSE AND CONTACT INFORMATION 
Section: 13
Time: 2:20 to 3:10
Location: SEH 7040

INSTRUCTOR 
Name: Brian Wright 
Campus Address: Corcoran Hall 426a
Phone: 703-244-5573
Email: bwright6@email.gwu.edu
Office hours: Upon Request

Teaching Assistant 
Name:TBD
Campus Address:
Email: 

COURSE DESCRIPTION 
Called the “Sexiest Job Title of the 21st Century” by the Harvard Business Review, Data Science and analytics are a booming industry.  But what is a Data Scientist, what do they do, and how do you become one?  These questions and more will be discussed and answered in this introductory course.  This class covers the basic ideas and techniques of data science, including its definition and the context in data-driven computation and practical applications. 

LEARNING OUTCOMES 
As a result of completing this course, students will be able to 
1.	Understand the fundamental principles of data science and the variety and types of data scientists
2.	Understand the research process and lifecycle associated with answering data driven problems 
3.	Initial understanding of statistical models and how they are applied to data problems
4.	Gain experience with the using R to do analyses

COURSE PREREQUISITE
You are expected to have a basic understanding of R coding, either through online resources or previous experiences.

TENTATIVE SCHEDULE

Topics	Reading (Before Class)	Topic	Activity	Assignment (Due following Tuesday)

Topic 1	Doing Data Science:
    Preface/Chapter 1
        Art of Data Science: Sections 1 and 2	History of Data Science, What is a Data Scientist, Data Science Lifecycle	R Installed
R Studio Installed 
Discussion/Ice Breaker
Find a Data Science Job
Datacamp:
Intro to R: 1&2

Topic 2 	Art of Data Science Chapters 3 
The Art of R Programming: Intro and Getting Started  

Articles:
-	Analyzing the Analyzers
-	Critical Questions for Big Data 
Research Process/Asking a Question/R Overview (Tidyverse/Dplyr)/ Exploratory Data Analysis I 	Discussion/Set Project Groups	

Topic 3 	Art of Data Chapter 4
Reading: Doing Data Science: Chapter 2
Intro to Descriptive Statistics (EDA) II	Descriptive Statistics	Assignment

Topic 4	Open Intro to Stats 3.1, 3.2 and Chpt 4
Reading: Introduction to Stats Learning 2.1 and 2.2
Hypothesis Testing and Statistical Inference – Chi-Square	In Class Exercise	

Topic 5	
Open Intro to Stats 5.5	
ANOVA - Model comparison 	

Topic 6 	
Reading: Doing Data Science Chapter 3, Intro to Stats Learning Chapter 3
Open Intro to Stats Chapter 7	
Intro to Model Building: Prediction Regression  I	In Class Exercise	Assignment
				
Project I Presentations

Topic 7	
Open Intro to Stats Chapter 8
Intro to Model Building: Prediction  Regression II

Topic 8 
Reading Intro to Statistical Learning 6.1 and 6.5	Feature Selection/Sub- Setting/RMSE	Speaker	Assignment

Topic 9  
Reading Doing Data Science Chapter 71 - 81, Intro to Stats Learning 4.6.5, Doing Data Science Chapter 71 - 81
Clustering: K-Nearest Neighbor	
	
Topic 10    	
Reading Intro to Stats Learning 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
Open Intro to Stats 8.4	
Model Building: Classification I: Logistic Regression/GLM	In Class Exercise	Assignment

Topic 11  
Reading Intro to Statistical Learning 6.2, 6.4, 6.6	Lasso Regression	In Class Exercise	Quiz

Topic 12 
Reading Intro to Stats Learning Chapter 8 
Decision Trees

Final Projects Presentations




TIME REQUIRED 

During the semester, including study time for quizzes, students are expected to spend a minimum of one and half hours of
out-of-class work for every 50 minutes of direct instruction for a total of roughly five hours per week. 


TEXTBOOKS AND COURSE RESOURCES 
No one book fully captures the variety of skills and knowledge being given in this course. Consequently, I have pre-selected chapters from a variety of sources. These will all be provided prior or during the course. 

Please download R and Rstudio located here: https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/

Begin to explore Data Science blogs, listservs, and journals.  A few are listed below to help get you started:
•	http://www.datasciencecentral.com/
•	https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/
•	http://www.datatau.com/
•	https://www.facebook.com/data?_rdr=p
•	http://freakonomics.com/
•	http://harvarddatascience.com/
•	http://www.informationisbeautiful.net/blog/
•	http://blog.kaggle.com/
•	https://www.r-bloggers.com/
•	http://blog.yhat.com/ 
•	https://analytics.googleblog.com/ 
•	http://datasciencemasters.org/ 

Start networking now:
•	Follow the following on Twitter for Predictive Analytics: @DataScienceCtrl, @analyticbridge, @mgualtieri, @doug_laney, @Hypatia_LeslieA, @hyounpark, and @anilbatra 
•	Follow the following on Twitter for Big Data and Data Sciences: Vincent Granvill, Alistair Croll, Alex Popescu, @rethinkdb, Amy Heineike, Anthony Goldbloom, Ben Lorica, @oreillymedia., Bill Hewitt, Carla Gentry CSPO, David Smith, David Feinleib, Derrick Harris, DJ Patil, Doug Laney - Edd Dumbill, Eric Kavanagh, Fern Halper, Gil Press, Hilary Mason, Jake Porway, James Gingerich, James Kobielus, Jeff Hammerbacher, Jeff Kelly, Jim Harris, Justin Lovell, Kevin Weil, Krish Krishnan, Manish Bhatt, Merv Adrian, Michael Driscoll, Monica Rogati, Neil Raden, Paul Philp, Peter Skomoroch, Philip (Flip) Kromer, Philip Russom, Paul Zikopoulos, Russell Jurney, Sid Probstein, Stewart Townsend, Todd Lipcon, Troy Sadkowsky, William McKnight, Yves Mulkers


INDEPENDENT OR OUT-OF-CLASS LEARNING 
Average minimum amount of out-of-class or independent learning expected per week is 5 hours, for our 2.5 hour of classroom meeting. With the knowledge of basic statistics that a student must possess to take this class, the terms “average” and “minimum” should require no further explanation.




LEARNING ASSIGNMENTS 
In-Class Exercise: These assessments will be used to check learning and give feedback on areas for improvement. Reading prior to class, class attendance, and participation in activities are essential for success on this part of the course.
Homework Assignments: Details on requirements will be given during class periods. Most assignments will be due the next class period and can be submitted via blackboard. We will work to provide feedback at the next class session. 
Class Projects: Two group projects will be assigned over the semester to give students practice on applying data science principles and methods to various problems. Students will also build teamwork, communication, and technical skills.
Quizzes: Two quizzes will be given to ensure students are gaining knowledge and doing out of class readings 

GRADING
Your final grade will be determined by:
•	Assignments (25%)
•	Quizzes (25%)
•	Project I (25%)
•	Project II (25%)

GRADING SCALE
93-100 A
90-92 A-
87-89 B+
83-86 B
80-82 B-
77-79 C+
73-76 C
70-72 C-
<70 F


UNIVERSITY POLICIES
OBSERVANCE OF RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS 
In accordance with University policy, students should notify faculty during the first week of the semester of their intention to be absent from class on their day(s) of religious observance. 
For details and policy, see: students.gwu.edu/accommodations-religious-holidays.



ACADEMIC INTEGRITY CODE
Academic dishonesty is defined as cheating of any kind, including misrepresenting one's own work, taking credit for the work of others without crediting them and without appropriate authorization, and the fabrication of information. 
For details and complete code, see: studentconduct.gwu.edu/code-academic-integrity

SAFETY AND SECURITY
In the case of an emergency, if at all possible, the class should shelter in place. If the building that the class is in is affected, follow the evacuation procedures for the building. After evacuation, seek shelter at a predetermined rendezvous location.

SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS OUTSIDE THE CLASSROOM
DISABILITY SUPPORT SERVICES (DSS)
Any student who may need an accommodation based on the potential impact of a disability should contact the Disability Support Services office at 202-994-8250 in the Rome Hall, Suite 102, to establish eligibility and to coordinate reasonable accommodations. 
For additional information see: disabilitysupport.gwu.edu/

MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES  202-994-5300
The University's Mental Health Services offers 24/7 assistance and referral to address students' personal, social, career, and study skills problems. Services for students include: crisis and emergency mental health consultations confidential assessment, counseling services (individual and small group), and referrals. 
For additional information see: counselingcenter.gwu.edu/ 

